Races 
Racial Traits 

The description of each race includes racial traits 
that are common to members of that race. The 
following entries appear among the traits of most 
races. 

Ability Score Increase 
Every race increases one or more of a character’s 
ability scores. 

Age 
The age entry notes the age when a member of the 
race is considered an adult, as well as the race’s 
expected lifespan. This information can help you 
decide how old your character is at the start of the 
game. You can choose any age for your character, 
which could provide an explanation for some of your 
ability scores. For example, if you play a young or 
very old character, your age could explain a 
particularly low Strength or Constitution score, 
while advanced age could account for a high 
Intelligence or Wisdom. 

Alignment 
Most races have tendencies toward certain 
alignments, described in this entry. These are not 
binding for player characters, but considering why 
your dwarf is chaotic, for example, in defiance of 
lawful dwarf society can help you better define your 
character. 

Size 
Characters of most races are Medium, a size category 
including creatures that are roughly 4 to 8 feet tall. 
Members of a few races are Small (between 2 and 4 
feet tall), which means that certain rules of the game 
affect them differently. The most important of these 
rules is that Small characters have trouble wielding 
heavy weapons, as explained in “Equipment.” 

Speed 
Your speed determines how far you can move when 
traveling ( “Adventuring”) and fighting (“Combat”). 

Languages 
By virtue of your race, your character can speak, 
read, and write certain languages. 

Subraces 
Some races have subraces. Members of a subrace 
have the traits of the parent race in addition to the 
traits specified for their subrace. Relationships 
among subraces vary significantly from race to race 
and world to world.  

Dwarf 
Dwarf Traits 

Your dwarf character has an assortment of inborn 
abilities, part and parcel of dwarven nature. 
  Ability Score Increase. Your Constitution score 
increases by 2. 
  Age. Dwarves mature at the same rate as humans, 
but they’re considered young until they reach the 
age of 50. On average, they live about 350 years. 
  Alignment. Most dwarves are lawful, believing 
firmly in the benefits of a well-­‐‑ordered society. They 
tend toward good as well, with a strong sense of fair 
play and a belief that everyone deserves to share in 
the benefits of a just order. 
  Size. Dwarves stand between 4 and 5 feet tall and 
average about 150 pounds. Your size is Medium. 
  Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feet. Your 
speed is not reduced by wearing heavy armor. 
  Darkvision. Accustomed to life underground, you 
have superior vision in dark and dim conditions. You 
can see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were 
bright light, and in darkness as if it were dim light. 
You can’t discern color in darkness, only shades of 
gray. 
  Dwarven Resilience. You have advantage on 
saving throws against poison, and you have 
resistance against poison damage. 
  Dwarven Combat Training. You have proficiency 
with the battleaxe, handaxe, light hammer, and 
warhammer. 
  Tool Proficiency. You gain proficiency with the 
artisan’s tools of your choice: smith’s tools, brewer’s 
supplies, or mason’s tools. 
  Stonecunning. Whenever you make an 
Intelligence (History) check related to the origin of 
stonework, you are considered proficient in the 
History skill and add double your proficiency bonus 
to the check, instead of your normal proficiency 
bonus. 
  Languages. You can speak, read, and write 
Common and Dwarvish. Dwarvish is full of hard 
consonants and guttural sounds, and those 
characteristics spill over into whatever other 
language a dwarf might speak. 


Hill Dwarf 
As a hill dwarf, you have keen senses, deep intuition, 
and remarkable resilience. 
  Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score 
increases by 1. 
  Dwarven Toughness. Your hit point maximum 
increases by 1, and it increases by 1 every time you 
gain a level. 

Elf 
Elf Traits 

Your elf character has a variety of natural abilities, 
the result of thousands of years of elven refinement. 
  Ability Score Increase. Your Dexterity score 
increases by 2. 
  Age. Although elves reach physical maturity at 
about the same age as humans, the elven 
understanding of adulthood goes beyond physical 
growth to encompass worldly experience. An elf 
typically claims adulthood and an adult name 
around the age of 100 and can live to be 750 years 
old. 
  Alignment. Elves love freedom, variety, and self-­‐‑
expression, so they lean strongly toward the gentler 
aspects of chaos. They value and protect others’ 
freedom as well as their own, and they are more 
often good than not. 
  Size. Elves range from under 5 to over 6 feet tall 
and have slender builds. Your size is Medium. 
Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 
Darkvision. Accustomed to twilit forests and the 
night sky, you have superior vision in dark and dim 
conditions. You can see in dim light within 60 feet of 
you as if it were bright light, and in darkness as if it 
were dim light. You can’t discern color in darkness, 
only shades of gray. 

Keen Senses. You have proficiency in the 

Perception skill. 
  Fey Ancestry. You have advantage on saving 
throws against being charmed, and magic can’t put 
you to sleep. 
  Trance. Elves don’t need to sleep. Instead, they 
meditate deeply, remaining semiconscious, for 4 
hours a day. (The Common word for such meditation 
is “trance.”) While meditating, you can dream after a 
fashion; such dreams are actually mental exercises 
that have become reflexive through years of practice. 
After resting in this way, you gain the same benefit 
that a human does from 8 hours of sleep. 

  Languages. You can speak, read, and write 
Common and Elvish. Elvish is fluid, with subtle 
intonations and intricate grammar. Elven literature 
is rich and varied, and their songs and poems are 
famous among other races. Many bards learn their 
language so they can add Elvish ballads to their 
repertoires. 

High Elf 
As a high elf, you have a keen mind and a mastery of 
at least the basics of magic. In many fantasy gaming 
worlds, there are two kinds of high elves. One type is 
haughty and reclusive, believing themselves to be 
superior to non-­‐‑elves and even other elves. The 
other type is more common and more friendly, and 
often encountered among humans and other races. 
  Ability Score Increase. Your Intelligence score 
increases by 1. 
  Elf Weapon Training. You have proficiency with 
the longsword, shortsword, shortbow, and longbow. 
  Cantrip. You know one cantrip of your choice 
from the wizard spell list. Intelligence is your 
spellcasting ability for it. 
  Extra Language. You can speak, read, and write 
one extra language of your choice. 

Halfling 
Halfling Traits 

Your halfling character has a number of traits in 
common with all other halflings. 
  Ability Score Increase. Your Dexterity score 
increases by 2. 
  Age. A halfling reaches adulthood at the age of 20 
and generally lives into the middle of his or her 
second century. 
  Alignment. Most halflings are lawful good. As a 
rule, they are good-­‐‑hearted and kind, hate to see 
others in pain, and have no tolerance for oppression. 
They are also very orderly and traditional, leaning 
heavily on the support of their community and the 
comfort of their old ways. 
  Size. Halflings average about 3 feet tall and weigh 
about 40 pounds. Your size is Small. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feet. 

  Lucky. When you roll a 1 on the d20 for an attack 
roll, ability check, or saving throw, you can reroll the 
die and must use the new roll. 

Brave. You have advantage on saving throws 

against being frightened. 


  Halfling Nimbleness. You can move through the 
space of any creature that is of a size larger than 
yours. 
  Languages. You can speak, read, and write 
Common and Halfling. The Halfling language isn’t 
secret, but halflings are loath to share it with others. 
They write very little, so they don’t have a rich body 
of literature. Their oral tradition, however, is very 
strong. Almost all halflings speak Common to 
converse with the people in whose lands they dwell 
or through which they are traveling. 

Lightfoot 
As a lightfoot halfling, you can easily hide from 
notice, even using other people as cover. You’re 
inclined to be affable and get along well with others. 
  Lightfoots are more prone to wanderlust than 
other halflings, and often dwell alongside other races 
or take up a nomadic life. 
  Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma score 
increases by 1. 
  Naturally Stealthy. You can attempt to hide even 
when you are obscured only by a creature that is at 
least one size larger than you. 

Human 
Human Traits 

It’s hard to make generalizations about humans, but 
your human character has these traits. 
  Ability Score Increase. Your ability scores each 
increase by 1. 
  Age. Humans reach adulthood in their late teens 
and live less than a century. 
  Alignment. Humans tend toward no particular 
alignment. The best and the worst are found among 
them. 
  Size. Humans vary widely in height and build, 
from barely 5 feet to well over 6 feet tall. Regardless 
of your position in that range, your size is Medium. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 
  Languages. You can speak, read, and write 
Common and one extra language of your choice. 
Humans typically learn the languages of other 
peoples they deal with, including obscure dialects. 
They are fond of sprinkling their speech with words 
borrowed from other tongues: Orc curses, Elvish 
musical expressions, Dwarvish military phrases, and 
so on. 

Dragonborn 
Dragonborn Traits 

Your draconic heritage manifests in a variety of 
traits you share with other dragonborn. 
  Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score 
increases by 2, and your Charisma score increases 
by 1. 
  Age. Young dragonborn grow quickly. They walk 
hours after hatching, attain the size and 
development of a 10-­‐‑year-­‐‑old human child by the 
age of 3, and reach adulthood by 15. They live to be 
around 80. 
  Alignment. Dragonborn tend to extremes, making 
a conscious choice for one side or the other in the 
cosmic war between good and evil. Most dragonborn 
are good, but those who side with evil can be terrible 
villains. 
  Size. Dragonborn are taller and heavier than 
humans, standing well over 6 feet tall and averaging 
almost 250 pounds. Your size is Medium. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Draconic Ancestry 
Dragon 
Black 
Blue 
Brass 
Bronze 
Copper 
Gold 
Green 
Red 
Silver 
White 

Damage Type 
Acid 
Lightning 
Fire 
Lightning 
Acid 
Fire 
Poison 
Fire 
Cold 
Cold 

Breath Weapon 
5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save) 
5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save) 
5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save) 
5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save) 
5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save) 
15 ft. cone (Dex. save) 
15 ft. cone (Con. save) 
15 ft. cone (Dex. save) 
15 ft. cone (Con. save) 
15 ft. cone (Con. save) 

  Draconic Ancestry. You have draconic ancestry. 
Choose one type of dragon from the Draconic 
Ancestry table. Your breath weapon and damage 
resistance are determined by the dragon type, as 
shown in the table. 
  Breath Weapon. You can use your action to 
exhale destructive energy. Your draconic ancestry 
determines the size, shape, and damage type of the 
exhalation. 
  When you use your breath weapon, each creature 
in the area of the exhalation must make a saving 
throw, the type of which is determined by your 
draconic ancestry. The DC for this saving throw 
equals 8 + your Constitution modifier + your 
proficiency bonus. A creature takes 2d6 damage on a 
failed save, and half as much damage on a successful 
